# Walmart-Sales-SQL-Data-Analysis
This Walmart Sales Performance Analysis project utilizes SQL to extract valuable insights from sales data, aiming to optimize business strategies and enhance decision-making. By examining various aspects of sales performance, including product line efficiency, branch comparisons, payment preferences, and customer demographics, the analysis provides a comprehensive view of the retail operation.

The project demonstrates the power of SQL in transforming raw data into actionable business intelligence. It covers key areas such as revenue generation, product popularity, customer behavior, and satisfaction ratings. These insights can guide inventory management, marketing strategies, branch operations, and customer experience improvements.
Through a series of targeted SQL queries, this analysis offers a data-driven approach to understanding and improving Walmart's retail performance across different locations and product categories.

## Key Analyses

### Product Line Performance
Evaluates the success of different product lines based on quantity sold and revenue generated. Useful for inventory management and marketing strategies.

### Branch Revenue Comparison
Compares total revenue across different branches. Helps identify high-performing locations and areas for improvement.

### Product Line Performance by Branch
Breaks down product line performance for each branch. Valuable for tailoring inventory and marketing to local preferences.

### Payment Method Analysis
Examines the popularity of different payment types overall and by branch. Informs decisions on payment system investments and promotions.

### Customer Demographics
Analyzes customer types and gender distribution. Useful for targeted marketing and customer experience improvements.

### Product Ratings Analysis
Investigates product ratings, highlighting top-rated products and those needing improvement. Guides quality control and product development efforts.

## Data Source
- Kaggle

## Analysis Overview

### 1. Performance of Each Product Line Based on Total Number of Orders
Description: This analysis calculates the total quantity of orders for each product line. It helps in understanding which product lines are the most popular based on the number of orders.

-- Convert Quantity field to integer
```sql
alter table walmartsales
alter column Quantity int
go
```

-- Use temp tables for  calculation

```sql
drop table if exists #TempSalesdata
create table #TempSalesdata
(Productline nvarchar(255), Quantity int)
```
-- Insert data into temp table

```sql
insert into #TempSalesdata
select Productline, Quantity
from walmartsales
```
-- Calculate total quantity for each product line
```sql
select Productline, sum(Quantity) as TotalQuantity
from #TempSalesdata
group by Productline
```
-- Calculate percentage quantity for each product line
```sql
select Productline, TotalQuantity, cast((TotalQuantity*100.0)/sum(TotalQuantity) over() as decimal(5,2)) as Percentageqty
from(select Productline, sum(Quantity) as TotalQuantity
from #TempSalesdata
group by Productline) as subquery
order by Percentageqty desc
```

### 2. Total Revenue Generated by Each Branch
Description: This analysis calculates the total revenue generated by each branch. It helps in identifying which branches are the most profitable.
```sql
select Branch, sum(Revenue) as Total_revenue
from walmartsales
group by Branch
order by Total_revenue desc
```

### 3. Performance of Each Product Line Based on Total Revenue Generated
Description: This analysis calculates the total revenue generated by each product line. It helps in understanding which product lines contribute the most to the overall revenue.
- For this we shall use CTE

-- Define the CTE
```sql
With RevenueTotals as (select Productline, Sum(Revenue) as TotalRevenue
from walmartsales
group by Productline)
```
-- Calculate the percentage revenue for each product line
```sql
select Productline, TotalRevenue, cast((TotalRevenue*100.0)/sum(TotalRevenue) over() as decimal(5,2)) as PercentageRevGenerated
from RevenueTotals
order by PercentageRevGenerated desc
```

### 4. Performance Per Branch by Revenue
Description: This analysis calculates the total revenue generated by each branch and the percentage contribution of each branch to the overall revenue.

-- Define the CTE
```sql
With RevenueTotalsperBranch as (select Branch, Sum(Revenue) as TotalRevenueperBranch
from walmartsales
group by Branch)
```

-- Calculate percentage revenue for each branch
```sql
select Branch, TotalRevenueperBranch, cast((TotalRevenueperbranch*100.0)/sum(TotalRevenueperBranch) over() as decimal(5,2)) as PercentageRevenueperBranch
from RevenueTotalsperBranch
order by PercentageRevenueperBranch desc
```

### 5. Performance of Each Product Line Per Branch Using Revenue
Description: This analysis calculates the total revenue generated by each product line within each branch. It helps in understanding the performance of product lines at a more granular level.

--For Branch A
```sql
select Productline,sum(Revenue) as Revenueperpdtline
from walmartsales
where Branch ='A'
group by Productline
order by Revenueperpdtline desc
```

--For branch B
```sql
select Productline,sum(Revenue) as Revenueperpdtline
from walmartsales
where Branch ='B'
group by Productline
order by Revenueperpdtline desc
```

--For branch C
```sql
select Productline,sum(Revenue) as Revenueperpdtline
from walmartsales
where Branch ='C'
group by Productline
order by Revenueperpdtline desc
```
### 6. Analysis of Payment Types
Description: This analysis calculates the overall percentage of each payment type and the distribution of payment types per branch. It helps in understanding customer payment preferences.

-- Overall payment type distribution
```sql
With PaymenttypeTotals as (select Paymenttype, count(Paymenttype) as countofpaymenttype
from walmartsales
group by Paymenttype)
```

-- Calculate percentage of each payment type
```sql
select Paymenttype, countofpaymenttype, cast((countofpaymenttype*100.0)/sum(countofpaymenttype) over() as decimal(5,2)) as Percentageofpaymenttype
from PaymenttypeTotals
order by Percentageofpaymenttype desc
```

-- Payment type distribution per branch
-- For Branch A

```sql
select Paymenttype,count(Paymenttype) as countofpaymenttype
from walmartsales
where Branch='A'
group by Paymenttype
order by countofpaymenttype desc
```
-- For Branch B
```sql
select Paymenttype,count(Paymenttype) as countofpaymenttype
from walmartsales
where Branch='B'
group by Paymenttype
order by countofpaymenttype desc
```

-- For Branch C
```sql
select Paymenttype,count(Paymenttype) as countofpaymenttype
from walmartsales
where Branch='C'
group by Paymenttype
order by countofpaymenttype desc
```

### 7. Branch Locations
Description: This analysis identifies the cities in which the different branches are located.
```sql
select distinct Branch, City
from walmartsales
```
### 8. Customer Type Distribution
Description: This analysis calculates the distribution of customer types. It helps in understanding the customer base.
```sql
select Customertype, count(Customertype) as countofcustomertype
from walmartsales
group by Customertype
order by countofcustomertype desc
```

### 9. Gender Distribution
Description: This analysis calculates the distribution of customers by gender. It helps in understanding the gender demographics of the customer base.
```sql
select Gender, Count(Gender)as countofgender
from walmartsales
group by gender
order by countofgender desc
```

### 10. Product Ratings
Description: This analysis evaluates the ratings of each product line, including the maximum rating achieved, the number of ratings 80% and above, below 60%, and between 59% and 80%.

--  Maximum rating achieved by each product line
```sql
select Productline, max(Rating) as maxpdtlinerating
from walmartsales
group by Productline
order by maxpdtlinerating desc
 ```

-- Ratings 80% and above
```sql
 select Productline, count(Rating) as Rating80andabove
 from walmartsales
 where Rating>=8.0
 group by Productline 
 order by Rating80andabove desc
```

 -- Ratings below 60%
 ```sql
 select Productline, count(Rating) as Ratingbelow60
 from walmartsales
 where Rating <6.0
 group by Productline 
 order by Ratingbelow60 desc
 ```

-- Ratings between 59% and 80%
```sql
select Productline, count(Rating) as countofneutralratings
from walmartsales
where Rating >5.9 and Rating <8.0
group by Productline 
order by countofneutralratings desc
```
## Data Visualization
- Click link to view Power Bi dashboard (https://github.com/AAinemukama/Data-Visualizations-Power-BI-and-Excel/blob/main/walmartviz.pbix)
